# Introductory Programming Principles Class Overview

The world is becoming more and more reliant on technology every year. As such, knowledge and experience with computers and programming is becoming more and more vital in our society, and people who are proficient with computers are valued more than ever. Many introductory programming courses that are easily accessible do not truly teach programming, but rather how to do small projects or games in one specific language. They are more akin to a follow-this-example tutorial rather than an actual class that teaches the theories behind programming. In contrast to most classes, this curriculum does not focus on syntax but instead on the core concepts and strategies used by programmers. In the end, students should see the meaning behind the words, the logic between the lines, and they should truly understand what they are doing. By seeing the ideas behind the code, students will be better prepared for the world of computer science.

This class places a heavy emphasis on abstract programming concepts rather than specific implementations. To do this, the lessons teach abstract concepts, and then examples are practiced in two different languages (SNAP! 4.0 and Java). While this may be harder to teach and grasp, it achieves two goals that I think are critical to efficient programming practices. First, it develops a deeper sense of what is going on in a program beyond the specific syntax. This is very useful, as truly understanding what a program is doing allows programmers to better debug and improve their programs. Some people refer to this as a “sixth sense”, as when someone truly understands something, it seems as if they are able to anticipate what’s going to happen even before it actually occurs. The second goal of teaching abstract concepts is to develop syntax-independent understanding in the students. Much like spoken languages, different computer languages can say the same thing in different ways, and if you approach learning each language individually, it can be very time-consuming. A practice many multilingual people use to learn languages is to learn the roots of languages, like Latin or Greek or Roman, from which they can then extrapolate to quickly learn new languages that are based on those ones. By understanding the meaning and base logic of the way computers think, programmers can more quickly learn other languages and are more versatile and effective as a result.

The lessons for this class are grouped by general concepts in programming. As such, sometimes multiple different concepts will be taught before they are used in practice problems or assignments. The concepts that are covered in the class range from simple concepts like sequencing and looping to more in-depth ideas such as recursion and algorithms. Like many curricula, this one builds on previous concepts a lot, using knowledge learned previously to help reinforce and enrich new concepts. By building like this, it allows students to help obtain that deep understanding I discussed earlier, and as a result, they are more likely to remember the concepts when they need them.

Much of this class is also focused on the planning process of programming and the decisions made during that stage. A lot of computer science experts will say that program design and requirement specifications are some of the most important stages of writing a good program, and too many classes don’t focus on that enough. A lot of different cultures have sayings that generally mean to think before you act. If you jump into writing a program without planning, there will be more mistakes and poor decisions made throughout the process. By planning, you intend to make all of the hard decisions up front, and as a result, you often find the mistakes while it’s still easy to fix them. Also, when working in the programming and computer science related industries, clients will often have an idea of the final product more than the actual logic behind the curtain. Being able to see this kind of requirement spec and being able to interpret and plan around it is an invaluable skill to possess.

___

For your benefit, here is an overview of the lessons in the class. The first lesson is about sequencing, which is the order in which operations are performed on a computer. If the right operations are given in the wrong order, then the overall effect might be completely different. Thus, understanding what order operations should be performed on a computer is extremely important. Students will be challenged to make simple programs with premade actions and also will have to debug and fix programs that have operations in the wrong order.

The second lesson is about conditionals, which are switches in programs that choose which action to perform given some decision condition. Conditionals are extremely useful in programs as they allow for complex and reactive behavior in algorithms. Being able to understand and fully utilize conditionals opens up huge possibilities for programmers, and knowing how to properly stack conditionals to generate complex behavior is a skill that not enough people know. The students will have to practice using various types of conditional statements to complete projects that require different behaviors under different circumstances.

The third lesson is about logic operators. Logic operators are incredibly powerful because they allow for conditional statements to be chained into even more complex programs. By using logic operators to combine conditions, you can filter actions by more than one factor at a time, and even work differently depending on different combinations of the same factors. This concept builds on the idea of conditionals and allows for more versatility in the use of conditional statements. Projects for students include building on previous projects, primarily adding functionality for multiple inputs. By doing this, students will hopefully be able to better internalize the ideas of logic operators, and in doing so be able to better implement them in future challenges.

The fourth lesson is on loops, one of the most common tools in programming. Loops run the same piece of code over and over again a certain number of times based on certain criteria, and can be set up to run/stop running in various ways and with respect to many different types of conditions. Understanding the possibilities of loops, the options that are available for any given problem, is extremely useful in being able to write an efficient program. Students will be challenged to use different types of loops in this lesson’s exercises, as well as chain them together to see the opportunities that are available. There are a few main types of loops that are common, and those will be covered in the main curriculum.

The fifth lesson is about variables, arguably the most important tool used by programmers overall. Variables are like magic for many new programmers, and everyone wants to use them right away, but knowing what they are and understanding how they work will allow students to utilize their full potential in their programs. Variables are simply ways of remembering state in a program, which just means that data can be remembered throughout a program. While this may seem simple, the idea of being able to use a result from earlier in a later calculation is what allows programs to do almost everything they are capable of. Students will learn the various types of variables in this lesson, as well as their common uses. Practice examples will make students use the different common variables both individually and in conjunction with other types of variables.

The sixth lesson is about functions and algorithms. Algorithms are simply a sequence of operations that is designed to have a specific, useful effect on a value or group of values. Algorithms are what allow people to organize and comprehend vast amounts of raw data, and make predictions and interpretations based on that data. Functions are a method of abstraction in programs. What is meant by that is that functions allow for the same piece of code to be used over and over without having to write it over and over, thereby making the program easier to understand and easier to debug. Using functions correctly and understanding the purpose of functions will lead programmers to write more readable and efficient code. In this lesson, students will be instructed to make some of their previous projects into functions, as well as develop some new ones that are based on common algorithms.

The seventh lesson is on data structures. Data structures are ways in which data can be grouped in organized ways. What this means is that data can be held in a grouping so as to add value to the data simply by having some data be related to another. For instance, a name and an age are somewhat useful, but if you have both of them then it’s easier to get an image of what a person is like. Certain common data structures are provided with most programming languages, but often programmers make custom data structures by combining existing ones in order to satisfy their unique needs. Students in this section will be challenged to utilize arrays and lists, two common types of data structures, in previous projects to update them. They will also be challenged to combine these structures to use them for a more custom topic, like a car’s data or a person’s information, to reinforce their understanding of how data structures work.

The eighth lesson is about object-oriented programming, and more specifically, about how classes and inheritance works. Classes are programming constructs that hold data and have methods to work with that data. Classes are written custom by programmers to fit their needs in the program, and they are often assigned to variables in order to use in their programs. Students will be challenged to update previous projects to take advantage of classes, as well as to make their own classes to hold specific types of data. They will then be challenged to write methods to get and set values within these classes and to use the data within them.

The ninth and final lesson is about planning and program design. I cannot stress this topic enough for its significance in programming: planning is key to any good program. If you do not plan your program, oftentimes problems will crop up that you weren’t expecting, and whose solutions involve a major rewrite of your program. This doesn’t mean that you should always stick to the plan, though. If you see an improvement, then you should consider it fully before deciding on a course of action. Students here will be challenged to both read and write requirement specifications and make a program plan based on them. Then they will be assessed on their ability to work through problems that occur throughout the process, as well as their optimizations they think of during the process of writing the program.

Programming and computer science are the jobs of the future. Every day our world is controlled more and more by computers, and people who know how to run these computers are in higher and higher demand because of it. Other people have seen this need, and have written classes for beginning programmers, but too often they don’t teach how to program, they teach how to use one specific language. This class teaches programming at the base level, with concepts and core ideas laid bare before the students, before layering the languages on top. Here, students will be more than good programmers; they will learn how not to be limited by language, and how to use their knowledge in more situations. This class will teach them how to truly understand programs, and in the end they will be more versatile because of it.
